---
layout: post
title:  "Some thoughts on roots and variation"
date:   2020-04-11 -0500
tags: Linguistics
author: Bronwyn
featured-img: /assets/images/root-rock.jpg
---

In this post I want to share some thoughts about the potential for crosslinguistic variation in the content of roots, inspired by the special session on roots at WCCFL 39, hosted virtually by UArizona in April 2021.

There were a number of talks and posters investigating and making claims about the properties of roots, many (if not most) within Distributed Morphology, a theory in which the standard assumption has been that roots are <i>acategorial</i>—they have no syntactic category of their own, but (obligatorily) unite with categorizing functional heads in the syntax. It is these categorizing heads, usually abbreviated <i>v</i>, <i>n</i>, <i>a</i>, etc that are responsible for category-specific behaviour. (CITE)

This idea has led to many insightful and fruitful research questions. But there are several ongoing debates about the properties of these acategorial roots, several of them on display in the WCCFL special session:

- Are roots idividuated in syntactic representations, or does syntax know nothing more than "there's a root here"?
- If roots *are* individuated, is this done by their form, their meaning, or by an arbitrary syntactic identifier?
- Can roots be associated with syntactically-visible formal features?

The exchanges in these debates seem generally to presume that whatever the answers are, we expect those answers to be stable across languages. It's this presumption that I want to push on a bit here.

As context for what I want to say about roots, let me first make some observations about the types of variation that are often proposed in another domain, the structurally "higher" projections associated with temporal meaning, in tense and aspect systems.

Now, much formal semantic work has tended to assume—sometimes implicitly—that even though not all languages have overt tense systems, they all have some kind of syntactic-semantic tense that plays a role in the composition of clauses—though the denotation of said tense may vary, and in some languages it may be underspecified.

More recently, though, there have been various proposals of greater variation "under the hood" in how languages do (or don't) represent tense. Ritter and Wiltschko (2014), for example, propose that all languages may use Infl to "anchor" clauses to the utterance situation, but that some languages do this via (non-)coincidence in time (tense), while others may do so via location or participants—other deictic aspects of contexts of situations.

Pancheva and Tonhauser (2019) make a quite different proposal that languages without morphosyntactic tense do not merely have *underspecified* semantic tense, but are actually best modelled as lacking tense entirely, with clausal temporal interpretations being derived purely by aspect.

Beyond variation in what dimensions of temporal meaning are represented in syntax (and subsequently interpreted by semantics or realized by morphology), there may also be variation in how the features that encode temporal meanings are bundled. Cowper and Hall (2012) propose that the bundling of tense and aspect changed over time in English, in the transition from the "passival" (*the house was building*) to the contemporary progressive passive (*the house was being built*). They argue that at earlier stages English clauses bundled voice and aspect  distinctions on a single functional head, only later separating them out. This proposal sits within a broader approach to features in syntax, proposing that features are constructed by learners in the course of acquisition on the basis of observed contrasts in language, mapped onto divisions in the nonlinguistic input. These nonlinguistic divisions are imposed by systems of human perception and cognition, building on the Contrastivist Hypothesis of Dresher (2009) for phonology.

What does any of this have to do with roots? Well, if we find this type of variation in structurally higher functional domains, we ought also to expect it in lower domains. In the history of Distributed Morphology in particular, there seems to have been a general assumption that roots are a radically different kind of object than functional heads are: that they have special "Encyclopedic" meanings, that they aren't subject to competition-based insertion, that they aren't individuated syntactically, and so on.

These special properties have to some extent melted away, or at least have become open for debate. So what special properties of roots remain? Unlike purely functional elements, roots unquestionably have some kind of non-grammatical meaning—meaning that is not encoded in the types of contrastive formal features to which syntactic structures can be sensitive.

And yet! There is no reason to think that these properties must be quarantined within a distinct syntactic object in all languages with the label "√"—at least not if we think contrastive syntactic features can be bundled differently in different languages.

This leaves interesting space for crosslinguistic variation. It could be that roots are bundled with categorial information in some but not all languages, or that they are bundled with fixed atoms of argument structure or event structure in some languages but not in others. Indeed, we might expect some languages to grammatically encode divisions of event structure (e.g. Russian, St̓át̓im̓cets), while others exhibit the same fundamental distinctions in interpretation (plausibly due to properties of how humans conceptualize events), but with no evidence of grammaticalization in the same ways (e.g. English).




Credit for header image: Diego Delso, CC BY-SA 3.0 <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0>, via Wikimedia Commons
